
\documentclass{article}

\usepackage{natbib}
\usepackage{times}

% hyperref must be last package.
\usepackage[colorlinks=true,citecolor=blue,hyperfootnotes=false]{hyperref}

\title{How Things Really Are\\{\Large Actually and Potentially}}
\author{Thomas E. Vaughan}

\begin{document}

\maketitle

\section{Introduction}

There is a great war raging.  It is a cultural war between Western Civilization
and her enemies.  By ``Western Civilization'' I mean what eventually emerged
from the confluence of ideas in ancient Israel and classical Greece.  First,
these ideas became intertwined in the production of the Septuagint; then they
were united in the minds of Christians, who conquered the declining Roman
empire from within, defended Europe against the onslaught of Muslim invaders,
and finally established a new civilization that produced modern
science\footnote{%
   The terms ``science'' and ``scientific'' are by etymology misleading.  In
   Latin, the verb ``scire'' means ``to know,'' but what we call a ``scientific
   theory,'' is in many cases something that can never be known as a truth.
   There are, of course, truths in modern science; primarily, these are
   \emph{observational} truths: Every repeatable observation is a truth of
   modern science.  Further, a scientific theory that refers only to
   perceptible things might in principle be a truth, if it be a descriptive
   theory, such as the arrangement of the bones in the human body.  However, a
   scientific theory that refers to something imperceptible, like the electron
   for example, might some day be superseded by a new theory making no
   reference to the imperceptible thing.  Its existence in reality is not
   certain, and so the theory referring to it cannot be known as a truth.%
}
and laws respecting the rights of man.  Western civilization has many enemies,
but perhaps her most serious enemies are atheism on the one side and Islam on
the other.  The atheists, like the Muslims, deny the Hebrew basis for universal
human rights; they deny that every human being is an image of God.  The
atheists, like the Muslims, also deny the Aristotelian metaphysical basis for
understanding reality.  The present talk is motivated by my interest in one,
narrow aspect of the great war: the attack on Western Civilization, ironically,
by the those who, espousing scientism and scientific realism, imagine
themselves to be advocates of modern science.  So I point to a philosophical
front in the war: the conflict over how things really are.

The story of the conflict begins in ancient Israel.  The relevant idea from
{\it Genesis} is that things have not always existed.  God, Who is not a thing,
initially created things from nothing.  Although a new thing might come into
existence from pre-existing things, which are transformed somehow into the new
thing, there was in the past a beginning when the first things were created ex
nihilo, not by transformation.  The fundamental distinction made by the ancient
Israelites is between God and what God creates.

Another thread of the story begins about 2,500 years ago with Thales of
Miletus, the intellectual patriarch of classical Greek philosophy.  Much as the
tradition of Abraham culminated in the writing of Moses, the tradition of
Thales culminated in the writing of Aristotle.  The relevant idea from
Aristotle was intended to explain the production of a new thing by
transformation from another thing: For a thing to change is for what existed
only potentially in a thing to become actual.  The fundamental distinction is
between actuality and potentiality.  This distinction is the root of what has
come to be called ``Aristotelian metaphysics,'' and any theory about what lies
at the root of being or becoming is now called ``a metaphysical
theory.''\footnote{%
   The word, ``metaphysics,'' originates from the accidental fact that in the
   traditional list of Aristotle's writings, his writing on the distinction
   between act and potency came after (meta) his writing on nature (physics).%
}

When, after having been lost for a time, Aristotle was reintroduced into the
West by Saint Thomas Aquinas, he perfected the metaphysical theory so that it
could explain not only change by transformation but also creation ex nihilo.
Aquinas showed how, even if there had been no beginning in time, there would
still be creation ex nihilo at every moment in time!  Ironically, although
Aristotle's metaphysical theory naturally led to the emergence of modern
science in the West, Aristotle's opponents in the present conflict mount their
attack ostensibly under the banner of science.

The self-proclaimed ``science advocate,'' opposing the Aristotelian position,
typically proposes two main errors:
\begin{enumerate}
   \item \emph{scientism}, according to which everything that exists is
      describable by modern science, and
   \item \emph{scientific realism}, according to which an imperceptible thing
      proposed as part of a scientific theory is certain to exist.
\end{enumerate}
We shall see in what follows how Aristotelian metaphysics provides powerful
arguments against these errors.  First, however, we must make the key
distinction.

\section{Act and Potency}

\subsection{The General Theory}

\subsubsection{Example: Silly Putty}

\subsection{Causal Powers and Laws of Nature}

\section{Efficient and Final Causality}

\section{Formal and Material Causality}

\section{Essence and Existence}

\bibliographystyle{plainnat}

\begin{thebibliography}{}

\bibitem[Feser(2014)Feser]{sm}
Feser, E.\ \ {\it Scholastic Metaphysics: A Contemporary Introduction.}
      editiones scholasticae (www.editiones-scholasticae.de). Heusenstamm.
      2014.

\end{thebibliography}

\end{document}

